-In this section,
we will learn about some
of the basic commands in Linux
specifically related to navigation
and creating new files and directories.
We will do this by completing a simple task
using the Linux shell.
Our goal is to create a directory structure.
The top most directory, which is /home/Michael,
is already created,
as it is the home directory,
but everything else underneath
has to be created.
First,
we have to create four new directories
under slash home slash Michael.
These directory names
represent the continents,
Asia,
Europe,
Africa
and America.
Under each continent,
there is at least one country
and under some countries, there is a city.
Each item in this diagram
represents a directory.
Let's start from the beginning.
Once we log into the shell
as the user called Michael,
we would be in the home directory by default,
which is /home/Michael.
To validate that you are in fact,
in the home directory,
run the PWD
or the present working directory
command.
This should print the present directory
you are on.
If you have just opened the terminal,
the directory should be /home/
followed by the username,
which in this case is Michael.
To see the contents of this directory,
run the LS command.
If nothing is printed,
it means the home directory is empty.
Our next task is to create the directories
representing the continents
in the current directory.
To do this,
we will make use of the MKDIR
or make directory command.
With this command,
we will provide arguments for the continent,
either one at a time or altogether.
Once the directories are created,
we can run an LS command again
to verify that they have been created.
Next, let us create the countries.
One way to do this
is to change directory
from the home directory
to one of the directories
representing a continent,
such as Asia,
and then create the directory.
Running the PWD command again
will show us that
the current working directory
has changed from the home directory
to /home/Michael/Asia.
Next, we can create the directory
called China and India
using the MKDIR command that we used before.
Once this is done,
we can either choose to create the rest
of the countries in other continents
or create the city
inside the country directory,
wherever it is applicable.
From the diagram,
we know that India has a city directory
called Mumbai.
We can do this by changing directory to India
and then running the MKDIR command
or use another way to do this.
This can also be done
by running the MKDIR command
with the argument India/Mumbai.
This command effectively creates
the directory called Mumbai
without having to go inside
the directory called India.
If you wanted to create
the directory called Mumbai
without having to create
the directory called India first,
you can run the MKDIR with the -p option
followed by India/Mumbai.
This command option
allows the creation of parent directories
and hence creates both the directory
called India
and then the directory called Mumbai
under it.
Now, let's see how to go up a directory
to /home/Michael,
from the directory we are in,
which is called Asia.
To do this,
we can run the CD command followed by two dots,
or you can run the CD command
without arguments,
which will automatically change
the directory to the home directory
from any location in the system.
You can also run CD followed
by the complete path of the directory,
which is /home/Michael.
We can now create the rest of the directories
using the same steps as before.
Bob follows this example task
in his own laptop
and is able to create
the directory structure
in his home directory,
which is /home/Bob.
He clicks on the next topic.
Now that you are familiar with navigating
through directories and Linux
and commands such as PWD and CD,
it is a good time to talk
about absolute path and relative path.
Consider an example
where the user is in the home directory
at the path /home/Michael
and wanted to go to the directory called Asia.
He could do it two ways.
The first way,
is to specify the complete path
to the directory,
all the way from the root directory,
which would be /home/Michael/Asia.
This is an example
of an absolute path in Linux.
The absolute path
is the location of a file or directory
starting from the root directory.
The root directory is denoted by a slash.
This directory
is the top-most directory in Linux
and all other directories
such as home, reside, beneath it.
In the example here,
the absolute path is /home/Michael.
The relative path is the path in relation
to the present working directory.
An example of a relative path
is when we move from the home directory,
/home/Michael,
to the directory called Asia
by just running CD Asia,
instead of specifying the entire path
starting from the root directory.
An alternative to the CD or change directory
is the PUSHD command.
This command remembers
the current working directory
before changing to the directory
specified in the command argument.
In this example,
we are changing to the directory /etc
from the home directory.
The home directory
is saved to the top of the directory stack.
Once this is done,
the user may change directories
as many times as he wishes in the terminal.
To return back to the original directory,
which in this case is the home directory,
use the POPD command.
You can push multiple such directories down
and then pop back when required.
When you run POPD,
the last pushed directory comes out first.
"I will definitely have to try that out."
Bob thinks and navigates to the next section.
Now let us look at some more
basic commands in Linux.
To learn these commands,
we will make use
of the same directory structure as before.
However,
now there are some new files
and directories added,
as shown in the diagram.
The goal of this task
is to make sure that the directory structure
looks like the diagram on the right in the end.
If you look at the diagram on the left,
you will notice a couple of mistakes.
The directory called Morocco
has been created in Europe instead of Africa.
This has to be corrected.
There is another correction to be made.
The city called Mumbai has a typo
that needs to be fixed.
There is a file called city.txt
under the Mumbai directory.
The exact same file has to be copied
to the Cairo directory.
We also want to remove
the file called Tottenham.txt
from the directory called London.
Just like before,
let's do this task one step at a time.
First,
let's move the directory called Morocco
from Europe to Africa.
To do this, we will make use of the MV command.
This command requires two arguments.
The first argument is the source file
or directory,
and the second argument
is the destination directory
where we want to be moved.
Using absolute path,
this can be done easily using the command
MV /home/Michael/Europe/Morocco
followed by the second argument,
which is the destination directory,
/home/Michael/Africa.
This will move the directory
from Europe to Africa.
You can also use
the relative path to achieve this,
but before you do,
please be aware
of your present working directory.
If you are currently
in the user Michael's home directory,
then you can exclude /home/Michael
from the source and destination paths.
Going forward, we will simply use
relative path for all commands,
assuming we are
in the user Michael's home directory.
Moving along,
let's now fix the typo in the name
of the directory called Mumbai.
We can do this by running
the same MV command as before.
Use MV as shown here.
The first argument is the directory,
which has to be renamed,
and the second argument is the relative path
to the correct directory name.
Once this is run,
the directory will be renamed.
On to the next task of this sample exercise.
We need to copy the city.txt file
located under the directory called Mumbai
to the directory called Cairo.
To do this, we will make use of the CP command.
Similar to MV,
this command also expects two arguments.
The first argument is the source file
or directory.
The second argument is the destination.
This will copy the file from
the Mumbai directory to the destination,
which is the Cairo directory.
Finally,
to delete the file called Tottenham.txt
from the directory called London,
we will use the RM command
followed by the file name.
Before we move on, make a note that to copy
or delete a directory using CP or RM,
you would have to make use of the -r option.
This option stands for recursive operation.
Time to learn some more commands
through another task.
This time we will see how to create a file
and add data to it.
Let's first see how to read the contents
of the file city.txt in the Mumbai directory.
The simplest way to do this
is by using the CAT command.
Run the cat or concatenate command
with the file name as the argument
and the contents, if any,
will be printed on the screen.
In this case, the city.txt file
has a single word, Mumbai, in it.
You can also add data to the file using cat.
Since it's a copy,
the city.txt file under the Cairo directory
also contains the single word Mumbai in it.
To replace this data,
use the cat command
and the redirection symbol,
which is the forward arrow symbol
followed by the file name.
Once this command is issued,
the prompt will wait for a user input.
You would be able to add lines of text.
Use the enter key
to type into a new line of text
and key in control plus D to exit out
of this prompt and save data to the file.
Finally, what if you want to create
an empty file called country.txt
under the directory called China?
One very simple way to do this
is to make use of the touch command.
Use the command called touch
and argument
/home/Michael/Asia/China/country.txt.
This will create a new empty file
called country.txt
under the China directory.
There are other ways
to redirect data into a file.
We will cover these in chapter two
of the quick start guide.
You can also see the data in a file
using pagers
such as the more and the less command.
With the more command, you can view text files
in a scrollable manner.
You can scroll back one
or more screens at a time
and can also search for a pattern of text
within the file.
To scroll down one screen full of data,
use the space bar.
To scroll one line, use enter.
Use the letter B to scroll back
one screen at a time
and the backslash to search for a pattern.
Use the Q key to exit out.
More, loads the entire file at once,
and is not the best choice
when dealing with large files.
Similar to more,
the less command allows you
to view the contents of a file
and navigate through the file.
Besides the options here,
there are several powerful text editors
out there
that are commonly used for reading, writing,
and manipulating data in a file.
We have a separate section dedicated to this
later in this guide.
We saw earlier that the LS
or list storage command
is useful to list the continents
of a directory in the Linux file system.
That is one basic usage of the command.
To get more details,
use the long list which is LS followed by a -l.
This command provides more details
about the files and directories
such as the access modes,
ownership,
the last accessed time,
et cetera.
Don't worry if these terms are new to you,
they will be covered later.
In Linux, a hidden file or directory,
can be viewed by using the ls -a command.
The hidden files and directories
are preceded by a single dot or a full stop.
When you run an ls -a,
you will notice two files represented
by a dot and double dots.
The single dot refers
to the current working directory
and the double dot refers to the directory
in the file system
which is above
or before the current directory.
We saw this briefly
when working with CD command,
cd.. takes you to the previous directory,
while cd. does not change the directory,
as it refers
to the current working directory.
Finally,
if you want to list all the files based
on the order they were modified,
you can use ls -lt.
To do the reverse and print files
from oldest to newest,
use the ls -ltr command.